 Children's Day: The Little-Known Benefits Of Inclusion of Millets In Children's Diet 




Millets are a traditional staple food that are making a great comeback owing to their excellent nutrition profile, sustainability and environmental benefits. India is the world's leading producer of millets. Jowar (sorghum), Bajra (pearl millet), Ragi (finger millet), Little millet, Kodo millet, Foxtail millet, Proso millet, and Barnyard millet are some of India's millet crops. These tiny grains are packed with nutrients, antioxidants, and fibre, making them nutritionally superior and now recognized as Nutri- Cereals. 
Every parent prioritizes their child's physical and mental development. Fulfilling the child's daily nutrition needs is both necessary and difficult at times. The key is to identify foods that provide the best nutrition and are also versatile to be made into different recipes with ease. Millet is an excellent grain that provides sufficient nutrition to children. It is gluten-free, nutritious, easily digestible, and a less allergenic grain that can be given to your children in various  forms like  a  delicious finger food (puffs, cookies, cutlets ect) or a part of main meal (Khichdi, Dos, Idli, roti etc)Furthermore, millet very versatile hence can be used multiple simple daily tiffin recipes.   It is filled with natural goodness of multiple vital nutrients that are essential for a child’s daily growth & development. 
High on Nutrition 
When it comes to planning a proper diet for children, it is essential that all-important nutritional aspects should be included in their diet for their daily nutritional needs and proper growth. Millet is a nutritious grain that is beneficial to one's health in many ways.. It is high in fiber, protein, iron & calcium, making it essential for children to consume. Children have unique nutritional requirements that are different from adults and hence require foods that are able to provide them with the goodness of essential macro & micro nutrients.  Millets, a wondrous superfood rich in essential nutrients, are an excellent addition to a child's daily balanced diet. ITC’s Aashirvaad Multi Millet Mix is an innovative and complex blend of millet grains, being naturally rich in essential nutrients like protein- that  supports muscle development, Zinc- that aids normal cognitive functions, Magnesium that helps reduce fatigue, Fiber- that supports good digestion amongst others, hereby enabling children to be their best versions.  Millets in general have goodness of calcium that  helps develop strong bones, which is essential for children as they are in their growing phase and also Iron that’s aids in formation of hemoglobin. 
Good for the gut 
Millets contain 15-20% dietary fiber, which will support children’s overall digestive health and are a good source of prebiotic fibers that help support healthy gut bacteria growth. They are naturally gluten-free, non-acid-forming foods and easy to digest making them ideal for consumption by children.

Fights Malnutrition/ Gaps in Daily Nutrition leading to Health Issues 
Malnutrition is another major cause of concern among children, increasing their susceptibility to infections, reducing their chances of recovery, and impeding their growth and development. Millets as major staples in diverse balanced diets for children will help address the growing concern of malnutrition. ITC’s Aashirvaad Ragi Flour is a nutrient – rich superfood which contains a good amount of essential nutrients such as iron, protein, calcium, zinc, having tremendous health benefits. Children's undernutrition can also be addressed with millets because they are energy dense, and the micronutrient profile of millet, which includes iron, zinc, magnesium, B vitamins, and so on, will help to combat issues such as 'immunity,' 'anemia,' and 'hidden hunger.' Children have critical stages of growth and development, and nutrition remains an important contributing factor for them. Nutrient deficiencies in these stages can hinder the children’s physical &  overall development.

About the author:  is the Head-Nutrition Sciences, ITC Ltd (Foods Division). All views/opinions expressed in the article are of the author.
